# Semantic Analysis API

Semantic analysis is orchestrated by the `Compilation` and its per-tree
`SemanticModel`. Together they resolve symbols, infer types, track diagnostics,
and expose higher-level views such as operations.

---

## Building a compilation

Create a `Compilation` by supplying syntax trees (and optional references):

```csharp
var tree = SyntaxTree.ParseText(source);
var compilation = Compilation.Create("App", [tree]);
```

Compilations are immutable—`AddSyntaxTrees`, `AddReferences`, and
`WithAssemblyName` return new instances that share existing state. Each
compilation manages a binder factory, declaration table, and synthesized symbols
for features such as delegates and the entry point.【F:src/Raven.CodeAnalysis/Compilation.cs†L1-L130】

## Accessing semantic models

`GetSemanticModel` materializes a `SemanticModel` for a specific tree. The
compilation caches models so repeated calls return the same instance. Models are
created eagerly when diagnostics or symbol queries require them, ensuring binder
state is populated before answering questions.【F:src/Raven.CodeAnalysis/Compilation.cs†L82-L123】

Each semantic model wires up the binder chain for the tree's root during
construction. `EnsureDiagnosticsCollected` walks the syntax tree and binds
expressions and statements on demand so later queries operate on cached bound
nodes.【F:src/Raven.CodeAnalysis/SemanticModel.cs†L1-L71】

## Diagnostics

`SemanticModel.GetDiagnostics` consolidates binder diagnostics, deduplicates
entries, and caches the resulting immutable array. It triggers binding for the
current tree if diagnostics have not yet been collected.【F:src/Raven.CodeAnalysis/SemanticModel.cs†L23-L45】

At the tree level, `SyntaxTree.GetDiagnostics` provides parser diagnostics. A
compilation's `Emit` and `GetEntryPoint` flows also surface aggregated
information when generating IL or determining the program entry point.【F:src/Raven.CodeAnalysis/Syntax/SyntaxTree.cs†L46-L67】【F:src/Raven.CodeAnalysis/Compilation.cs†L124-L206】

## Symbol and type queries

`GetSymbolInfo` retrieves the symbol associated with a syntax node by binding the
node (or using cached results). For declarations, `GetDeclaredSymbol` resolves
keys from the declaration table and uses the symbol factory to return the
canonical symbol. `GetTypeInfo` has overloads for expressions and type syntax,
returning both the inferred and converted types when available.【F:src/Raven.CodeAnalysis/SemanticModel.cs†L47-L143】

These APIs cooperate with the binder hierarchy described in the semantic binding
architecture notes. Binders chain by scope so lookups naturally fall back to
parent contexts while preserving local information.【F:docs/compiler/architecture/semantic-binding.md†L1-L64】

## Operations

For syntax-agnostic analysis, call `SemanticModel.GetOperation`. The semantic
model caches realized operations and uses `OperationFactory` to translate bound
nodes into `IOperation` instances that mirror Roslyn's shape. The dedicated
[Operations API](operations.md) document covers the available kinds, caching
behavior, and current limitations.【F:src/Raven.CodeAnalysis/SemanticModel.Operations.cs†L1-L45】【F:docs/compiler/api/operations.md†L1-L55】
